What's the right thing to do?
We ask this question when the choices aren't clear,
or we're not sure how a decision will affect others.
Making ethical decisions requires thinking
about more than just numbers and laws
or what's best for business.
So how do you make the right choice?
Ethical decision-making adds a human dimension
to the way we think about issues.
It means considering right and wrong.
Ethical decision-making asks us to think about
the moral implications of a choice we have to make.
For example, allowing employees to leave work early
before a winter storm may decrease the day's profits,
but it's the best decision to keep everyone safe,
but how do you make ethical decisions
when there are no universal rules
to determine right and wrong?
Well, many industries have their own set of guidelines,
sometimes called code of ethics.
One example is the Hippocratic Oath in medicine,
which asks physicians to avoid harm,
treat patients to the best of their ability,
and keep patient information confidential.
Individual companies can also have
their own ethical guidelines.
These can take the form of broader company policies,
organizational core values,
or employee codes of conduct.
In the absence of these preexisting codes,
here are four guidelines to keep in mind.
With any workplace decision,
legality must be among the first considerations.
Will this meet local and federal regulations?
Generally, your decisions should also agree
with company policy, and if it doesn't,
you need to be able to defend it on ethical grounds.
For example, if a hurricane hits a city
and a customer wants to return some items
after your 90-day return period because stores were closed,
do you make an exception or stick to the 90-day policy?
Though we shouldn't always base decisions solely
on what we personally think is right or wrong,
morality is a factor in ethical decision-making.
For example, an employee might be allowed to smoke
on the office patio,
but because they think it's wrong to expose others
to secondhand smoke, they choose to avoid smoking
on the patio when nonsmokers are around.
Fairness is key to making ethical decisions.
Ask yourself, will the decision affect everyone
in the same way,
or does it benefit some people over others?
keep these four factors in mind
as you go through the decision-making process.
So, how do we actually make a decision?
Let's break down the process step by step.
First, determine the issue.
What makes it an ethical decision
rather than a simple business matter?
Consider the answers to questions like,
does it affect employee wellbeing or consumer safety?
What are potential consequences for the environment?
Does it impact society at large?
Next, gather the facts.
Think about who's involved in the decision,
then ask yourself, is this a short-term or long-term issue?
How is it impacting the business right now?
Third, list all options.
This is when you can brainstorm creative alternatives
and get rid of options that don't make sense.
Here are some questions to help you along.
Is this solution legal?
Does this option follow company guidelines?
Fourth, examine and experiment with the options.
Think about the potential consequences of each option.
Are there any similar examples you can learn from?
Can you roll out small changes to test it out?
For example, a company committed to employee wellbeing
wants to make a fair decision when it comes to perks,
but they're not sure how applicable
the perks are to everyone,
so they do a trial before making them official.
Finally, make a decision and implement it.
If you're not sure if it's the right decision, ask yourself,
is this the best choice based on the previous steps?
How would the team respond to this decision?
Making ethical decisions isn't always easy,
but having a set of guidelines
and a step-by-step process can make
an ethical choice easier.
Remember, companies and industries
can have their own codes of ethics
to lay out important values.
To confront ethical decisions at work,
first determine the ethical aspects of a problem.
Once you have gathered all the facts
and examined your options, you can make a choice.
Following these steps
will help you make sound ethical decisions
that will benefit your business, coworkers, and customers.